# SESYNC Summer Institute Team Title: Woody Weeds in Eastern Africa

## Description of the project
Climate change, land degradation and invasive alien species are three important threats to peoples’ livelihoods in arid and semi-arid parts of Eastern Africa. Each of these factors has a negative influence on ecosystem services, such as vegetation biomass, which is a prime resource for pastoralists and agro-pastoralists in the region. For example, rainfall patterns have changed as a result of climate change leading to unreliable fodder availability, overgrazing has degraded grasslands and invasive alien plant species reduce the access, the abundance and the quality of available grassland. The reduced availability of grazing lands and other natural resources, and the associated changes in peoples’ livelihoods, has increased the likelihood of social conflicts and deterioration of cultural values in several regions in Eastern Africa. Moreover, the reduction of available grazing land and thus the reduced number of cattle may lead to a reduced potential of accumulating wealth, since a livestock herd serves as a “store of wealth” for many Eastern African pastoralists and agro-pastoralists. Thus, management of invasive alien plant species and restoration of grasslands are needed to alleviate the tensions and secure peoples’ livelihoods.

Prosopis juliflora (from now on Prosopis), a tree species native to the Americas, has been introduced to the region in the late 1970s and early 1980s for various environmental socio-economic benefits to these arid and semi-arid areas. In Baringo County in Kenya, Prosopis was introduced in the 1980s as part of an effort to improve livelihoods by providing wind breaks and a wood source for timber, fuelwood and charcoal. The Kenyan government has promoted the use of Prosopis for various reasons, including carbon sequestration to alleviate climate change. Given the generally disturbed nature of the habitats in Baringo County, it can be expected that the highly productive and abundant Prosopis increases soil organic carbon (SOC) content, thus contributing to climate change mitigation and resulting in payments for carbon credits. Furthermore, the production of charcoal is considered a potential source of income for local communities and as a livelihoods diversification strategy for pastoralists and agro-pastoralists. 

On the other hand, while Prosopis has provided, and continues to provide, these benefits it has also spread rapidly across a large area, leading to social tensions because of its negative environmental effects, including inhibiting growth of grasses and limiting access to seasonal grazing land. The well-documented negative impacts of this species include reduced accessibility of land and water sources due to its long thorns, reduced vegetation cover and groundwater availability. The latter is mainly caused by the deep tap roots and evergreen nature of the species, which make it a better competitor for ground water than native plant species, which are not as deeply rooted and are dormant during dry seasons.  Grassland is a key element for the sustenance of pastoralist livelihoods, a dominant and culturally important way of living in Eastern Africa and the reduction in grassland as a result of the Prosopis invasion threatens the traditional way of living of many people. Thus, there are clearly trade-offs associated with Prosopis invasion that must be considered when assessing its impacts and implications for its management and related policy.

An important factor for assessing the net impacts of Prosopis invasions is SOC. Although Prosopis invasions may contribute to increases in SOC, This must be assessed in terms of its effects on grasslands, which are also important for maintaining SOC stocks.  Grasslands are among the vegetation types with the highest SOC content, on an equal level as, or, as some studies suggest, exceeding Prosopis stands. The variation in the effect of Prosopis on SOC content is dependent on the level of ecosystem degradation prior to invasion, for example as a result of overgrazing or land use change. Thus, for a degraded ecosystem it is likely that Prosopis contributes to increases in SOC content, although restoring these degraded grazing lands with indigenous grasses and trees is more effective for restoring SOC content. 

Baringo County in Kenya is a semi-arid region around Lake Baringo that is highly affected by Prosopis invasion and overexploitation of resources. The effects of Prosopis on ecology and livelihoods in the region have been studied for three years by the Woody Weeds project (www.woodyweeds.org - Woody Invasive Alien Species in East Africa: Assessing and mitigating their negative impacts on ecosystem services and rural livelihood, funded by the Swiss National Science Foundation and the Swiss Development Corporation), which will continue for another three years. In this project we hypothesize, among other things, that managing Prosopis in a way that reduces its negative impacts, while maintaining benefits, and restoration or protection of grasslands may be beneficial for SOC content and peoples’ livelihoods. However, it is unclear where, what area and in what optimum density Prosopis and grassland should be present to optimise these ecosystem services. 

Clearly, the management of Prosopis and restoration of grasslands is a complex problem that requires inter- and transdisciplinary collaboration. The complexity emanates from the peculiar features of this woody plant species by having both environmental and livelihoods benefits and adverse effects. Research informing such management decisions requires integration and joint analysis of data from different disciplines especially from ecology and socio-economics. Therefore, we propose an integrated, spatial and temporal analysis of the effects of grassland degradation and Prosopis invasion on SOC and selected aspects of livelihoods in Baringo County, Kenya, during SESYNC’s Summer Institute.

### The specific objectives of our project during the SESYNC Summer Institute will be: 
1.	a spatial assessment of current SOC stocks in Baringo County, 
2.	an assessment of past SOC stocks and how these have changed over the past 30 years (as a result of changes in land use and land cover and Prosopis invasion),
3.	modelling of future land use and IAS management scenario(s) and their impact on SOC stocks, and
4.	an assessment of what the implications of the other objectives are for carbon credits and livelihoods, in particular the effect of grassland restoration on the carrying capacity with respect to cattle. 

The team consists of five people working in the Woody Weeds project: two senior scientists from Switzerland, who co-lead two of the Work Packages in the Woody Weeds project, and three early-career scientists, including two fourth-year PhD students, from three Eastern African countries. The team members cover socio-economy, remote sensing and GIS, ecology and soil science.  

#### Ketema Bekele

#### Purity Rima

#### Sandra Eckert

#### Charles Kilawe

#### René Eschen
René is an ecologist working with CABI, a intergovernmental organisation, and is based in Delémont, Switzerland. He co-leads a work package in the Woody Weeds project that is focussed on collecting ecological and socio-economic data on the plot or community level in Baringo.

